A total of 15,465 patients with NDD-CKD were enrolled in the study (Figure 1). The median (interquartile range [IQR]) change in eGFR in the decreasing, stable, and increasing groups was −4.8 (−8.2 to −3.2), −0.6 (−1.4 to 0.0), and 3.5 (1.9 to 6.7) ml/min per 1.73 m2/yr, respectively. “Cut” points for tertiles were −2.2 and 0.8 ml/min per 1.73 m2. In this study population, 41.3% had an eGFR that rose over time. The median (IQR) follow-up time was 2.9 (1.8 to 4.7), 4.5 (2.9 to 5.5), and 3.0 (1.9 to 4.5) years in those with decreasing, stable, and increasing eGFR groups over time, respectively. The median (IQR) number of serum creatinine values used to calculate eGFR values was 10 (6 to 17), 11 (7 to 17), and 8 (5 to 14) in the decreasing, stable, and increasing groups, respectively (P < 0.001 for the comparison of decreasing and stable eGFR, and increasing and stable eGFR).

During follow-up, AKI was common in all three groups; rates of hospital-associated AKI were 76.2, 34.8, and 60.6 per 1000 patient-years in the declining, stable, and increasing eGFR groups, respectively, whereas rates of community-associated AKI were 38.6, 13.7, and 23.6 per 1000 patient-years, respectively. Nutritional status, as reflected by longitudinal changes in BMI and serum albumin levels, varied over time. Across all three groups, both BMI and serum albumin levels fell during follow-up (Table 2).

There were 560, 379, and 388 deaths (with corresponding mortality rates of 34.7, 17.5, and 24.0 deaths per 1000 patient-years, P < 0.001 for all intergroup comparisons) in the declining, stable, and increasing eGFR groups, respectively.

In univariate analyses, baseline covariates associated with death included the following: older age, male gender, and smoking history; a history of heart failure, peripheral vascular disease, dementia, chronic liver disease, or higher Charlson Comorbidity Index score; proteinuria; and a prescription for a beta blocker, loop diuretic, aldosterone antagonist, coumadin, aspirin, calcium acetate, and insulin. Both hospital- and community-associated AKI were likewise associated with a higher likelihood of death. White race, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, increasing BMI over time, and the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents at baseline were associated with a lower risk of death. Both declining and increasing eGFR over time were associated with a higher risk of death, relative to those in the stable eGFR group.

In unadjusted and multivariate adjusted Cox proportional hazards models examining time to death, both decreasing and increasing eGFR were independently associated with death, relative to those in the stable group (Table 3). Other factors independently associated with death include older age, male gender, chronic liver disease, a higher Charlson Comorbidity Index score, use of beta blockers, aspirin, or coumadin, and baseline proteinuria. Higher baseline BMI, diastolic BP, eGFR, and HDL cholesterol levels all were associated with a lower risk of death. With the sequential addition of markers of changing nutritional status over time, as well as the inclusion of AKI events (both hospital- and community-associated) in a time-dependent fashion, the association between eGFR change and death was attenuated but qualitatively unchanged. Interactions between beta blockers and heart failure, as well as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and/or angiotensin receptor blocker use and proteinuria, were not significant. Vital status ascertainment was complete on patients censored for 18-month serum creatinine gaps; the risk of death associated with both decreasing (1.88, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.68 to 2.10) and increasing (1.64, 95% CI 1.46 to 1.84) eGFR change over time relative to those in the stable eGFR group was not qualitatively different when these censored patients were included and analyzed in the fully adjusted Cox proportional hazard model.

In fully adjusted subgroup analyses (Figure 2), the point estimate for the risk of death associated with decreasing eGFR over time was relatively consistent across groups. For those with increasing eGFR, the adjusted risk was likewise consistent across subgroups, with the exception of those younger than 60 years of age. Interactions were tested for each subpopulation of interest. Among those with declining (and relative to those with stable) eGFR, the mortality risk for those without diabetes was significantly larger than the risk for those with diabetes (P = 0.02). Among those with increasing (and relative to those with stable) eGFR, the mortality risk for those with proteinuria was significantly larger than the risk for those without proteinuria (P = 0.003). Interactions for all other subgroups with either declining or increasing eGFR were nonsignificant.

Unexpectedly, we found that increasing eGFR over time was independently associated with death. Al-Aly et al., reporting on the association between kidney function decline and mortality among a group (n = 4171) of military veterans with early stage 3 CKD and rheumatoid arthritis, found that approximately one third of their cohort had rising eGFR values over time, an observation which is inconsistent with consensus statements about progression of CKD (11,21). In addition to the observation that those with >4 ml/min per year of eGFR decline had approximately a 50% increased risk of death at a median follow-up of nearly 6 years, relative to those with stable kidney function, the investigators found that for those with a rising eGFR over time, there was a nonsignificant trend toward an increased risk of death relative to those with normal, age-related decline in kidney function. The investigators speculate that this observation is explained by malnutrition among those with increasing eGFR over time.

The reasons for our finding that increasing eGFR over time associates with an increased risk of death are not immediately apparent. Loss of lean body mass would be potentially explanatory, as poor nutritional status has been previously identified as a predictor of death among patients with CKD (6). We accounted for nutritional status at baseline (weight, BMI, and serum albumin levels) and during follow-up (changes in BMI and serum albumin); inclusion of these nutritional markers in our risk models only slightly attenuated the mortality risk associated with decline or gain in eGFR. Furthermore, in the subgroup of patients with declining nutritional parameters during follow-up, the adjusted mortality risk associated with an increasing eGFR over time remained robust, at 50% relative to those with stable function. Resolving AKI, while a recognized mortality risk factor in this population, might also account for a rising eGFR over time; however, inclusion of AKI events during follow-up did not qualitatively affect our study findings (and patients with both community- and hospital-associated AKI at entry were excluded). Improving intrinsic renal function is theoretically explanatory, yet is physiologically unlikely to occur in more than 40% of a general geriatric population with a substantial burden of cardiovascular disease and established CKD, and should not exacerbate mortality risk.

Changes in intravascular volume status, due to conditions like heart failure, liver disease, or other hemodynamic insults, might also explain an increase in eGFR over time, due to a dilutional effect on serum creatinine values. Subclinical physiologic changes in intravascular volume status might manifest as a rising eGFR over time, and in turn influence mortality risk among patients with CKD. Fluctuations in serum creatinine (and thus eGFR) due to subtle intravascular volume shifts is particularly common among those with chronic tubulointerstitial disease from small-vessel renal vascular disease. Finally, the statistical phenomenon of mean regression might theoretically explain some degree of eGFR rise over time among those with reduced baseline values. It is important to recognize that this study was not designed to assess the mortality risk associated with improving eGFR over time; thus, the observations reported in this regard remain hypothesis-generating and require further investigation.

We did not use a gold standard measure of GFR, but measured GFR is not practical for typical clinical use or large epidemiologic studies. Our model assumes a constant rate of eGFR change over time and does not account for the influence of time-dependent rate changes. Given that eGFR slope calculations included data points that qualify as community-associated AKI, the influence of such events relative to the non–AKI associated decline or increase in eGFR over time is difficult to ascertain definitively in this study, despite the inclusion of all types of AKI in survival modeling. Finally, the largely Caucasian population receiving care in this hospital system precludes extrapolation of study findings to non-Caucasian populations.

